# Atom: A hackable text editor for the 21st Century

Atom is an open source project closely associated with Git. Atom is easy on the eyes, easy to work work, and very extensible.

Atom is a text editor, but like none other you've probably worked with. Atom is a set of core functionality that allows for individuals to edit all forms of text content, but is used mostly for programming by programmers. Atom is tightly integrated into Git and GitHub - arguable the most popular social coding platform (see [social coding intro](http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/it-consultant/social-coding-the-next-wave-in-development/)).

>Editors like Sublime and TextMate offer convenience but only limited extensibility. On the other end of the spectrum, Emacs and Vim offer extreme flexibility, but they aren't very approachable and can only be customized with special-purpose scripting languages. (taken from Atom Flight Manual)

Out of the box, ATOM will do a good job at recognizing Python (and other) code; it will even let you easily preview Markdown (we'll be covering this later). It will do rudimentary code completion, and with optional packages, can be quite a powerful Python code management tool (See autocomplete tools below to find out how to enhance this functionality).

# Atom color coding: You'll notice that files in the directory tree will often have different colors.

When we gigin working with Git, you'll appreciate that Atom offers convenient color coding.
* GREEN indicates untracked files/changes
* YELLOW indicates a tracked file that has changed.
* Greyed-out files indicate that files to be ignored (as defined in .gitignore)

Atom limits your need to use the mouse to hunt and peck for features. In Atom you use your keyboard for most activities -- which, once familiar to you, will be a very productive way of work.

> To get started, try using `CTRL-ALT-P` to find and explore available commands.

Also, to find what command is attached to a particular key stroke. use `CTRL-`. this will popup a search dialog. Enter in any keystroke combination and the associated command will be listed. Re remove this window simply repeat the keystrokes `CTRL-`.

##Getting Atom
Atom should be installed on on the lab computers. For your own personal use, download and install Atom from [here](https://atom.io/).

##Getting Help on Atom
The atom flight manual is quite good (http://flight-manual.atom.io)

##Using Atom
Most times will launch Atom from right clicking in our directory. This will result in a new Atom session loading, and the current folder listed as the open project in the project tree on the left.

To add other project folder to your existing tree, `CTRL-ALT-O`

One of the most important commands is CTRL-ALT-P, this is a fuzzy search of all available commands, for instance, we can checkout the last committed code for the file we're working on (this will overwrite what we are working on, but is good for when we make a bad mistake and went down a completely wrong path)

## Recommended Packages to Install:

###Linter and Flake8
This will help you identify errors in your code and provide you code formatting guidance to nudge you to conform to PEP8.

To install a based "linter" package within Atom
```
apm install linter
```

Install python Flake8:
```
pip install flake8
pip install flake8-docstrings
```

Once you have the pyton Flake8 packages installed, now finally install the Atom package (https://atom.io/packages/linter-flake8):
```
apm install linter-flake8
```

###Minimap
This is a neat little sidebar that provides a long form view of your code and what portion is being displayed in your current view (https://atom.io/packages/minimap)
```
apm install minimap
```

## Autocomplete tools
Hyperclick: Provides API for to enable click jump to definition functions in Autocomplete-python (https://atom.io/packages/hyperclick)
```
apm install hyperclick
```
Autocomplete-python: Enhances Atom's base autocomplete features to better support Python coding (https://atom.io/packages/autocomplete-python).
```
apm install autocomplete-Python
```

## Python tools
Python-Tools: Though this is still a rather new package, it does provide some neat features such a refactoring and goto definition (https://atom.io/packages/python-tools)
```
apm  install python-tools
```
