
- [w03c08-1: Control Flow](#w03c08-1-control-flow)
	- [Basic branching](#basic-branching)
		- [If statements](#if-statements)
		- [Branching using Dictionaries](#branching-using-dictionaries)
	- [Loop Structures](#loop-structures)
		- [For loops](#for-loops)
			- [looping through all characters in a  string](#looping-through-all-characters-in-a-string)
		- [Looping through all members of a list](#looping-through-all-members-of-a-list)
		- [While Loops](#while-loops)
			- [Finite while loop:](#finite-while-loop)
			- [Infinite loop with terminating condition:](#infinite-loop-with-terminating-condition)
		- [Do while](#do-while)
		- [Break, continue and pass statements](#break-continue-and-pass-statements)
			- [Break: Terminates current loop](#break-terminates-current-loop)
			- [Continue: Stops executing the rest of the loop block, and starts next loop](#continue-stops-executing-the-rest-of-the-loop-block-and-starts-next-loop)
			- [Pass: An empty, or null, statement that serves as a placeholder](#pass-an-empty-or-null-statement-that-serves-as-a-placeholder)
	- [More on the Range function](#more-on-the-range-function)
	- [Exception Handling](#exception-handling)

# w03c08-1: Control Flow

In this section we introduce basic branching, loop structures and demonstrate exception handling.

## Basic branching

### If statements

Look at the structure of this following program:

```python
import random
number = random.randint(1,100)

guess = int(input("I'm thinking of a number between 1 and 100. What is it? : "))

if guess == number:
    print('The odds of getting this in the first guess are 1/100.')
    print('Congratulations, you guessed it.')
elif guess < number:
    print('No, it was a little higher than that')
else:
    print('No, it was a little lower than that')

print('Done')

```
<center><sub>[cf1.py](./sample_code/cf1.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>


Like any other computer language, in Python the meeting a condition involves evaluating a Boolean expression. The result from a Boolean expression is always either true or false. True and False are thus Boolean literatures, they are values.

```python

if True:
  print(True)
else:
  print(False)

if (10 == 10) == True:
  print(True)
elif (10 == 10) == False:
  print(False)
else:
  print(False)

```
<center><sub>[cf2.py](./sample_code/cf2.py)</sub></center>

> NOTE1: You would never see such logic in a "real" program. This example
simply illustrates the evaluation of a expression. For any if, or elif
the Boolean expression must evaluation to True for the associated block
of code to run.<

> NOTE2: Notice the use of "elif" (in contrast to Java's else if)<
<br>
<br>

Unlike in Java (and C variants) there is no `switch` statement in Python. But, you can use an if..elif..else statement to do the same thing. *Even better though, try branch with dictionaries!*

### Branching using Dictionaries

In some situations, you can use a dictionary for branching:

```python
passwords = {'Tim': 'sdfasdf', 'Bob': 'dfafsdc', 'Sue': 'wnkrewd'} # this is a dictionary data structure.
uname = input('Please enter your username : ')
username, password = uname, passwords.get(uname, 'unkown')
print(username,password)
```
<center><sub>[cf3.py](./sample_code/cf3.py)</sub></center>

> NOTE1: We can also have values in the dictionary be function names. This
presents a powerful mechanism to switch between different branches of
code - and can help eliminate complex "spaghetti code". We'll cover this
topic when we cover Python functions.<

> NOTE2: Notice how in Python we can assign multiple variables at once!<

<br>
<br>

## Loop Structures

In Python, the basic looping structures include For Loops and While Loops. NOTE: Though there are not "Do while" loop structures in Python, a "do while" loop can be made using Python while loops.

### For loops

For loops iterate over a list sequence. Any object that contains an iterable method can behave as such a list. Range() has an iterable method, and is typically used when we want to create a traditional for loop.


Python is a bit different from other languages wrt to the constraints used in for loops. When using a for loop in python we iterate through all the members of a sequence. Python has a built in function called "range" that allows us to build sequences to iterate over and recreate the for loop structures we are familiar with in other languages such as Java

```python
for x in range(0,5):
  print('x = ', x)
for x in range(10):
  print('x = ', x)
for x in range(5:10:2):
    print('x = ', x)
```
<center><sub>[cf6.py](./sample_code/cf6.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>

NOTE: The range() function is a specific example of a more general concept of generators, which we'll cover later in the course.

Python's approach allows us to do a number other convenient things -- like iterate through all members of any sequences- such as a tuple, a list, and even a string.

#### looping through all characters in a  string

Python makes it trivial to loop through every character found within a string.

```python
for letter in 'MIS407':
  print('Current Letter :', letter)
```

We can find any length of string (this applies to other data structures such as Tuples, and Lists) using the len() method. We can use len() along with range() to do the following:

```python
s = 'MIS407'
for i in range(len(s)):
  print('Current Letter:',s[i])
```

### Looping through all members of a list

Lists and tuples are ordered sets of objects (tuples are immutable lists, while lists are mutable -- what this means, and what's significant about this will be covered later when we discuss tuples and lists in greater depth).

Here, we iterate through all the objects found within the list "langs"

```python
langs = ['Python', 'Java',  'C', 'R']  # this is a list data structure.
for lang in langs:        # Second Example
   print('Current language :', lang)
```
<center><sub>[cf6b.py)](./sample_code/cf6b.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>

And, list with strings, we can also use an approach where we create an index to access the objects within a list:

```python
langs = ['Python', 'Java',  'C', 'R']
for i in range(len(langs))
   print('Current language :', lang[i])
```
<center><sub>[cf7.py](./sample_code/cf7.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>

### While Loops

While loops are the other common looping structure in Python.

#### Finite while loop:

Finite while loops are ones with a clearly defined terminating condition.

```python
count = 0
while (count < 9):
   print('The count is:', count)
   count += 1
```
<center><sub>[whl1.py](./sample_code/whl1.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>


#### Infinite loop with terminating condition:

There are times when we need to create a loop that, though containing a clearly defined terminating condition, the termination of the loop is dependent on user (or file) input.

```python
num = 1
while (int(num) != 0):
   num = input("Enter a number (0 to stop)  :")
   print("You entered: ", num)
```
<center><sub>[whl2.py](./sample_code/whl2.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>

__NOTE__ Obviously, use infinite loops with care.

### Do while

Not all languages have a "Do While" loop, Python included. If you want "Do While" like functionality, try the following design pattern:

```python
while True:
  ## do some stuff
  ## do some more stuff
  if fail_condition_reached:
    break
```

### Break, continue and pass statements

#### Break: Terminates current loop

Break example
```python
for letter in "MIS407":
    if letter == '4':
        break
    print(letter)
```
<center><sub>[break1.py)](./sample_code/break1.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>


#### Continue: Stops executing the rest of the loop block, and starts next loop

The continue statement returns control to the beginning of a while loop.

Continue example
```python
while num > 0:
  num = (int)input("Input a whole number less than 100: ")
  if num > 99:
    continue
  print("Num = ", num)  
```

#### Pass: An empty, or null, statement that serves as a placeholder

Pass comment is basically a blank, do nothing statement, that is used where syntax dictates that a statement must exist, but you have no reason to include a statement.

Pass example
```python
for letter in "MIS407":
  if letter == '4':
    pass
    print("This is passed")
  print("Current letter", letter)

```
<center><sub>[pass.py](./sample_code/pass.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>


## More on the Range function

NOTE: This section is adapted from http://pythoncentral.io/pythons-range-function-explained/

Pythons range() function generates a list, or sequence, of numbers. It's most often used to find the range for a for loop.

The range() function has two sets of parameters, as follows:

* range(stop)
  * stop: Number of integers (whole numbers) to generate, starting from zero. eg. range(3) == [0, 1, 2].
* range([start], stop[, step])
  * start: Starting number of the sequence.
  * stop: Generate numbers up to, but not including this number.
  * step: Difference between each number in the sequence.

Rules:
* All parameters must be integers.
* All parameters can be positive or negative.
* range() (and Python in general) is 0-index based, meaning list indexes start at 0, not 1. eg. The syntax to access the first element of a list is mylist[0]. Therefore the last integer generated by range() is up to, but not including, stop. For example range(0, 5) generates integers from 0 up to, but not including, 5 (aka 4).

```
>>> for i in range(5):
...     print(i)
...
0
1
2
3
4
>>> for i in range(10, 12):
...     print(i)
...
10
11
>>> for i in range(3, 15, 3):
...     print(i)
...
3
6
9
12
>>> for i in range(0, -6, -2):
...     print(i)
...
0
-2
-4
```

## Exception Handling

Exception handling allows us control how our programs respond to exceptional conditions that could generate program errors.

The classic example is when we attempt to divide by zero:

```Python
try:
# Division by zero raises an exception
    x = int(input("Enter numberator: "))/int(input("Enter denominator: "))
    print("The result is = ", x)
except ZeroDivisionError:
    print("Tried to divide by zero!")
else:
    # Exception didn't occur, we're good.
    print("Whew, dodged a bullet there.")
finally:
    # This is executed after the code block is run
    # and all exceptions have been handled, even
    # if a new exception is raised while handling.
    print("We've now handled that!")

```
<center><sub>[exceptions1.py](./sample_code/exceptions1.py)</sub></center>
<br>
<br>

One common use of exception handling is when users provide input. By default, the input statement returns user input as a string. If we wish to ask the user for a number, but they do not input a number in the proper format an input value exception will be raise.

We can protect our program from such errors using patterns such as what follows:

```python
while True:
    try:
        n = int(input("Please enter an integer: "))
        break
    except ValueError:
        print("Bad user! You did not provide a valid integer! Please try again ...")
print("Good job. You are a nice obedient user.")
```

* *NOTE: You can read more about exceptions in Python here ... https://docs.python.org/3.3/tutorial/errors.html*
