#Git Basic Local Workflow

NOTE1: The following commands are meant to run in a bash terminal -- which is supplied with the standard install of git. Keep your terminal open, and when you're finished these commands - right click, select all, and copy and paste the commands from this session in notepad. Submit the result at end of class for your second ICA (save it to use as a reference to  help you remember how to do this in the future, and what problems you had).

## Setup the Project Folder

Using windows explore, go to a location where you'll be storing you work for MIS407. Go into this folder, and right click and select "Git Bash" to open a bash terminal.

Once the terminal is open, you'll execute these commands.

Create a test_git project:

```
pwd
mkdir test_git
cd test_git
pwd
```

Before we initial Git, you'll need to set some variables

## Configure Git
```
git --version
git config --global user.name "John Doe"
git config --global user.email "jdoe@iastate.edu"
git config --global --list
```

## Initialize your first local repo
```
git init
ls -la
```
Once the repo is initialized, you should find a .git directory in the projects folder. This should never be edited directly, it is managed through Git.

# Create a .gitignore file
Often our projects will contain files that we do not wish to track changes on (generally, we are interested in only tracking changes to the stuff we can read). We can tell git which files we want ignored using a .gitignore file.
```
echo "*.exe" >> .gitignore
ls -la
```
NOTE: for more info on gitignore see https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore

## Let's create our first "commit" to this new repo

Now let's add a file to our project, and then add this file to our staging area. We can always check the status of our staging area using the git status command. It's a very handy command - use it often.

```
echo "Testing Git" >> test.txt
ls
cat test.txt
git status
git add test.txt
git status
```
For more info on the status command see: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-status

Now, let's commit the staging area to our repo.

```
git commit -m "My first commit for Project"
git status
```
NOTE: For more information on the commit command see: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit

## Make a second commit to project
```
echo "A second file added to my repo" >> test2.txt
ls
cat test2.txt
git status
git add test2.txt
git status
git commit -m "Add test2.txt"
git status
```

## Review our repo history

As we make more and more commits, we'll often want to examine the history of changes and commits made to the repo.

```
git log
git log --pretty=oneline
git log -p
```
For more information on querying Git repo history see: https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History


NOTE: When using .gitignore you'll often find it showing up in the status checks in red. If you want to stop git from showing this, simple add a line to the .gitignore file that says ignore .gitignore

The .gitignore contents would look something like
.gitignore
*.exe
