# Cloning the class notes and admin repo to your local drive

Git is the technology that is used to store and manager our repositories and provide us with robust version control. GitHub is a cloud base service that uses Git to allow users to have a central Git repository that can be shared with others across the internet. Is it also a place where many opensource projects are being managed.

As mentioned in the previous classes, for this course we have a number of provide repositories within our MIS407-17s GitHub page. Much of the material for this course will be made available in the "Class Notes". If your sent us your GitHub username, you should now have access to Class Notes and a personal repos that is your own (CID00xx).

In this section, I will walk you through the process of cloning your personal repo to your local drive.

## Check your Git credentials

Before your clone this repo to your local drive, make sure you have the correct credentials set in your global environment.

```
git config --global --list
```

If name and email are incorrect,  see "git basics" from the first section of notes from this class (git_basic_local_workflow.md).

## Clone your cid10xx repo to your local drive.

Change to the MIS407 directory that you will be using to store your course material and start bash within this folder).

Using a web-browser, login to your GitHub account (the one you would have sent me via email). Select your cid00xx repos and copy the URL (see clone repo section in the upper right hand corner of the page)

Switch back to bash and type git clone and paste in the repository link that you copied frmo GitHub.
```
git clone https://github.com/MIS407-smith/YOUR-REPOSITORY
```
You now have a local copy of the central repository. You can now modify, stage, commit this repo locally, and when done, "push" updates to your GitHub repo.

## Pushing and Pulling

Once you have made a new commit, you should "push" these changes to your central repo. While in you local cid00xx repo, type the following:
``
git push origin master
```
You may be prompted for your username and password (this should only occur once, unless you move to another machine). Once you've successfully pushed your updates, then you can go to GitHub and view these updates.

If you do some work on another machine, and want update your local machine with the latest copy of your repo, you "pull" your content to your local machine.

```
git pull origin master
```

Sometime, there can be conflicts... that is, there are two different additions to a file and you need to tell Git which parts of the updates you would like merged. We'll cover this more later, until you begin working on group projects this will likely not be something you encounter. I encourage you to read up on how to merge content. More information on merging can be found [here](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-merge)
