

- [w02c07-1: Python Intro](#w02c07-1-python-intro)
	- [Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs)](#python-enhancement-proposals-peps)
	- [Python Versions](#python-versions)
	- [Python Terms](#python-terms)
	- [Installing Python](#installing-python)
- [Introduction - What is Python, why are we using it?](#introduction-what-is-python-why-are-we-using-it)
	- [Running a python programs](#running-a-python-programs)
	- [Python is Interpreted](#python-is-interpreted)
	- [Python Distributions](#python-distributions)
	- [Package Management with Pip](#package-management-with-pip)
		- [A note on Custom packages](#a-note-on-custom-packages)


# w02c07-1: Python Intro

Not named after snake, but from Monty Python (Guido was a big fan, and the  Python documentation and community can reflect this and be a bit humorous/whimsical)
Python has a unique culture and community based on it's core design philosophy on readability and syntax that enables you to write concise programs.

## Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs)

* Python language development is managed through PEP's
* Examples:
    * PEP0 provides index to the PEPS
    * PEP1 states the purpose of PEPS
    * PEP8 provides a style guide for python code
* PEP20 -- is known as the Zen of Python
  * Design principles for Python code
  * 20 aphorisms, but only 19 have been written down
  * Accessible from Python Shell
  * (exec. 'import this' from inside shell)

## Python Versions
Two main current version of Python
* Python 2 moved to maintenance... but will be supported until 2020
* Python 3 intentionally broke compatibility to make things better, it is the future of Python.

We will be using Python 3.

## Python Terms
* Code that fits the philosophy is Pythonic
* Pythonic has many positive connotations
* Unpythonic is a negative term with the opposite meaning
* Python practitioners can ben Pythonistas, Pythonists or other plays on the word Python

## Installing Python
-- windows
-- Linux (most distributions of Linux have python 3 installed (try running python3 from terminal -- CTL-D will exit to shell)
-- MacOS (Python is installed, but most are rather old. If you're not running 3.5+, then you should go to Python.org and download and install the latest version for MacOS), then acces the laterst version using the command python3.


# Introduction - What is Python, why are we using it?

Java is still one of the most popular languages, but some  polls indicate the interest in Python is growing as a faster rate:

https://www.google.com/trends/explore#q=java%2C%20python&cmpt=q&tz=Etc%2FGMT-2

Python has very active core development team surrounded a community of contributors and users. Those deep into Python "culture" can make you feel like it's "movement", a club, a social cause.

Python was originally uploaded onto the internet in 1991 by [Guido van Rossum](https://www.python.org/~guido/)(and [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guido_van_Rossum) entry), and [Dutch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netherlands)  programmer (now living in the United States and working for Dropbox).

Python's popularity has steadily grown since it's introduction - though managing Python has gone well beyond the capacity of one person, Guido still remains a ["benevolent dictator for life"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_dictator_for_life) for the Python community and project. He actively leads a community of core developers that continue to incrementally improving the language - and do so carefully, with much debate and thought, so as not to ruin the 'elegance' of Python and it's guiding philosophy (see ["The Zen of Python"](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0020/) by typing the command "import this" in the Python command line).

The official copies of Python are freely available from [Python.org](https://www.python.org/) and maintained by the [Python Software Foundation](https://www.python.org/psf/).

```
The Python Software Foundation (PSF) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation that holds the intellectual property rights behind the Python programming language. We manage the open source licensing for Python version 2.1 and later and own and protect the trademarks associated with Python. We also run the North American PyCon conference annually, support other Python conferences around the world, and fund Python related development with our grants program and by funding special projects.
```

>The mission of the Python Software Foundation is to promote, protect, and advance the Python programming language, and to support and facilitate the growth of a diverse and international community of Python programmers.<

The current version of Python is is 3.6 ( recent jump from 3.5.2).

Python is split into two main streams - Python 2 (currently 2.7) and the current Python 3 (currently Python 3.6). According to Guido there will not be a Python 2.8 ( .x versions add functionality, and .x.y versions are fixes), and will only be supported until 2020. Many programmers still use 2.7 because version 3 introduced necessary changes that meant breaking backward compatibility. Due to the difficult, and time consuming, nature of porting all the old code to the new version --- the transition has been long, and the support for the old code has been maintained a considerable amount of time. But, at some point, enough is enough, and this "hard" deadline has been set to be 2020 (See the python 2.7 countdown clock: https://pythonclock.org/)


## Running a python programs

You python code will be stored in files with the .py extension (i.e. test.py).

Python is Interpreted, and in order to run a python program, you need to send the file to the interpreter for execution.

On Windows, you'll need have Python installed (later, we'll cover how you can create an executable of your Python code, and thus run such code without the requirement for Python to be installed on the computer  that is running your software.)

You will need to install the python distribution from Python.org. Go to this site and select the appropriate download package for your computer (NOTE: PYTHON IS ALREADY INSTALLED ON THE CLASSROOM COMPUTERS)

## Python is Interpreted

Python is an interpreted language (in contrast to a compiled language). This has some advantages and disadvantages that will discuss more about later. One of the (arguably, only) disadvantage is speed. Speed of execution for interpreted languages (versus compiled languages) is generally  slower - but, they can vary considerably as some of the code Python constructs and 3rd libraries consist of very efficient compiled code (which is probably more efficient that you could write if you wanted too as a "one off" for your project).

## Python Distributions

A mentioned, we will be using the standard Python distribution available from Python.org.

You may hear about other versions of Python. One of the more popular is [Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads). Anaconda is a popular distribution focused data science packages/modules. It includes many of the core data science modules like numbpy, pandas, ipython, etc. (some of which we'll be using later). Unfortunately (but, some would argue it's a good thing), it also uses a different package manager (`conda install <package>`). This can create problems for situations where there isn't a conda version of your library available and you need to resort to using pip. Though not unmanageable, there can be conflicts and problems. If for some reason you wish to use conda (or other) you are welcome to, but you do so at your own risk. I will not be supporting, or helping, you with any package conflicts due to problems with another package management system such as conda -- and it will be your  responsibility to ensure you can mange the environment to be able to participate in class and due your assignments.

## Package Management with Pip

Python has many, many modules and packages that can be downloaded and installed. Included with Python is pip, which is pythons package manager (see https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installing/). Pip supports installing from PyPI (PyPI is the python Package index, which can be found here https://pypi.python.org/pypi). Once you learn the core languages constructs, you'll most likely will need to download and use a combination of python modules from PyPI to get any work done.

For instance, to install the request library (a library for HTTP requests)

```
$ pip install requests
```

### A note on Custom packages
Most of the Python packages that you'll be looking for will be available via "pip install", but you can come across specialized libraries that are not available for the Windows platform.  Since many Python modules/packages require compiled code, PiPI and pip may not have the appropriate files for your particular version of operating system and platform. For such libraries, you can find compiled versions of many python packages for windows (for instance, numpy and openCV -- which we'll be using later) on a site maintained by [Christoph Gohlke](http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/) (see: http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/_). Chistoph's site has various compiled versions of libraries for each Windows operating system (x32 vs x86, older windows, etc).

Such compiled libraries are contained within "wheel" files. To install, you simply download the file and run the command:

```
pip install whatever_the_name.whl
```
