
- [w03c07: Python Examples](#w03c07-python-examples)
	- [Simpler code than found in many other languages](#simpler-code-than-found-in-many-other-languages)
	- [Dynamic typing](#dynamic-typing)
	- [In Python Whitespace matters](#in-python-whitespace-matters)
	- [Finally, hello world](#finally-hello-world)

# w03c07: Python Examples

Let's begin our introduction to Python by looking at examples.

NOTE: In the next section of todays lecture, we will look at the two methods of running a Python program. In this section, we introduce code for an introduction of concepts and to familarized you with basic syntax. You don't need to know how to run code yet -- we will this in the next section.

## Simpler code than found in many other languages

In many ways, Python is much easier and less verbose than many other programming languages.

Here is an example of simple Java code (also, notice the error! The error here (use of uninitialized variable) is indicative of the problems and care that must be taken with strongly typed languages ):

```java
package varstest;

public class VarsTest {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int x;
        int y = 10;

        System.out.println(y);
        System.out.println(x);
    }
}

```

Here is this same example using Python

```python
x = None
y = 10
print(y)
print(x)
```

## Dynamic typing

The first thing to note that Python variable use is much more dynamic, that is, you don't need to declare variable types (but you can provide hints, and cast between different types). In the case of this code, we had to "go out of our way" to try to figure our how to create an uninitialized variable by using None. It's rare to need to do this.

```python
x = 10 # assigning a new variable x to the int value 10
print(x)
x = "Hello world" # no problems with reassigning to a string
print(x)
```

## In Python Whitespace matters

In Java, it's perfectly acceptable to do the following:

```java
int x=1   ;    int y= 2; System.out.print(x);System.out.println(y);
for (int i=1;i<10;i++) { System.out.println("Count is: " + i); }
```

We would normally never want to write code the way you see this in our example above. Convention dictates certain patterns, subsets of what are possible in the language syntax, that experienced programmers in the language consider acceptable (or "good code"). These conventions are necessary to make the code easier to read.

* *NOTE: Past Perl language programmers (and some of those remaining, still do) pride themselves on how esoteric and twisted their code can be. Perl programmers value expression (almost like an artist) - Python sees such things as a waste of time.*

In Python, there is a pragmatic feel or approach to many things. In the case of whitespace, if we always follow a convention of indentation, why not just  include this in the language? This is what Python has done.

In python, a command is terminated by EOL (end of line). Code blocks are represented by indentation.

```python
x=1
y=2
print(x, end="")
print(y)
for x in range(1,11):
    print("Count is" + i)
```

Some further examples of indentation as identifying blocks:

```python
class Record(object):
    print('test')

def function_block():
    print('test')

if function_block():
    print("something")
else:
    print("something else")

for count in range (1,6):
    print(count)
else
    print("End of loop")

while count > 0:
    print(count)
    count-=1
else:
    print('End of loop')
```


## Finally, hello world

In Java:

```java
package helloworld;

public class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello World!");
    }
}

```

In Python:

```python
print("Hello World!")
```

I think this says much about what to expect from Python :)
